=head1 Slight differences between versions 3.2 and 4

This document lists functionality differences between Modules version 3.2 and Modules version 4. Modules version 3.2 is also referred in this document as I<compatibility version> whereas Modules version 4 is also referred as I<new main version>. Modules version 4 is based on what was previously called Modules-Tcl. The goal of this document is to reference the features of the compatibility version that are missing or behave differently on the new main version and the features that can only be found on this new version.

First part the of the document covers the features that are missing or that behave differently on Modules 4 than on compatibility version. The second part of the document covers the features that are specific to the Modules 4 version thus missing on compatibility version. Comparison takes as a basis version C<3.2.10> of compatibility version against Modules version C<4.0>. Any change made past these versions will explicitly mention the release number starting from the difference appears or disappears.

Regarding missing features, this document only lists their name or the command line argument related to them. Please refer to the B<module>(1) and the B<modulefile>(4) man pages of the compatibility or main version to learn the details about these features.

=head1 Features missing or with different behavior than compatibility version

This section describes the features of the compatibility version that are not supported or that behave differently on Modules 4.

=head2 Package Initialization

B<MODULESBEGINENV> environment snapshot functionality is not supported on version 4. Modules collection mechanism should be preferred to save and restore sets of enabled modulepaths and loaded modulefiles. Modules 4 also introduce a system configuration file F<etc/modulerc>, located in Modules installation directory. This F<modulerc> file is sourced by Modules shell initialization scripts and helps to setup the initial environment right after initializing the B<module> command.

=head2 Command line switches

=over

=item B<--force>, B<-f>

=item B<--human>

=item B<--verbose>, B<-v>

=item B<--silent>, B<-s>

=item B<--create>, B<-c>

=item B<--icase>, B<-i>

=item B<--userlvl> lvl, B<-u> lvl

These command line switches are not supported on Modules 4. When these options are passed on the command-line, it produces an I<Unsupported option> warning and command is ran with the unsupported switches ignored.

=item B<--ter>

=item B<--lon>

These intermediate-form command line switches are not supported on Modules 4. Short or long switch name should be used instead.

=item B<-h>

This command line switch is short version of B<--help> switch on Modules 4 whereas it is short version of B<--human> switch on compatibility version.

=back

=head2 Module Sub-Commands

On compatibility version, paths composing the B<MODULEPATH> environment variable may contain reference to environment variable. These variable references are resolved dynamically when B<MODULEPATH> is looked at during module sub-command action like B<avail>.

=over

=item B<clear>

=item B<update>

These module sub-commands are not supported on Modules 4.

=item B<refresh>

On compatibility version, only the shell aliases defined by the currently loaded modulefiles are set again on a B<refresh> command. Whereas on new main version this command is an alias on the B<reload> command that B<unload> then B<load> all the currently loaded modulefiles.

=item B<help>

Compatibility version redirects output made on stdout in B<ModulesHelp> Tcl procedure to stderr.

During an B<help> sub-command, only the B<ModulesHelp> Tcl procedure of a modulefile is interpreted on compatibility version. Version 4 interprets all the content of the modulefile, then call the B<ModulesHelp> procedure if it exists.

On version 4, B<ModulesHelp> subroutine is not ran if an error occurred during the interpretation of the I<modulefile> main body.

=item B<display>

On version 4, B<ModulesDisplay> subroutine is not ran if an error occurred during the interpretation of the I<modulefile> main body.

=item B<avail>

On compatibility version, the same Tcl interpreter is used for the interpretation of all F<.modulerc> or F<.version> files during an B<avail> command but the state of this interpreter is not reset between each interpretation. So some variable and procedure definitions may spread from one interpretation to another on this compatibility version. Modules 4 reuses the same interpreter for all F<.modulerc> or F<.version> interpretation but it is cleaned between each interpretation to protect from definition spread.

In case of B<--terse> or B<--long> mode, all enabled modulepaths will be displayed whether they hold result to display or not. Modules 4 outputs only the modulepaths where matching results are found. Modulepaths with no result to report are discarded from output.

=item B<apropos>

On Modules 4, I<string> passed as argument is always searched in a case insensitive manner.

=item B<load>

On Modules 4, the value of an environment variable is set even if the new value is the same as the current value of this variable in environment.

When an already loaded I<modulefiles> is asked for load again, compatibility version will refresh the shell alias definition this modulefile hold if any, whereas Modules 4 will ignore the new load order.

In case of I<modulefile> loading another modulefile, if sub-modulefile load fails calling modulefile will still be loaded on compatibility version whereas Modules 4 will also abort calling modulefile load.

=item B<unload>

On Modules 4, the value of an environment variable is set even if the new value is the same as the current value of this variable in environment.

Compatibility version enables to load a I<modulefile> by passing on the command-line the name of a module alias or symbolic version pointing to this modulefile. However this module alias or symbolic version name cannot be used to unload the modulefile once loaded. Modules 4 enables to pass a module alias or symbolic version name to unload a loaded modulefile referred by this name.

=item B<switch>

When switching on version 4 an I<old> modulefile by a I<new> one, no error is raised if I<old> modulefile is not currently loaded. In this situation compatibility version throws an error and abort switch action.

When switching on Modules 4 an I<old> modulefile by a I<new> one, this I<new> modulefile does not keep the position that the I<old> modulefile had in the B<LOADEDMODULES> list as done on compatibility version but it is appended to the end of the list. Same goes for PATH-like environment variables: replaced PATH component is appended to the end or prepended to the beginning of the relative PATH-like variable, not appended or prepended relatively to the position hold by the swapped PATH component.

=item B<use>

When the modulepath to enable is passed as a relative path, compatibility version will set it using passed relative name whereas Modules 4 will determine the corresponding absolute path and will register it rather passed relative name.

=item B<unuse>

Modules 4 provides path element counting feature which increases a reference counter each time a given path entry is added to a given environment variable. This feature also applies to the B<MODULEPATH> environment variable. As consequence a modulepath entry element is removed from the modulepath enabled list only if the related element counter is equal to 1. When unusing a modulepath if its reference counter is greater than 1, modulepath is kept enabled and reference counter is decreased by 1.

=item B<initadd>

=item B<initprepend>

=item B<initswitch>

On version 4 no message is displayed to give details on how list of modulefiles to load has been altered in initialization file.

=item B<initrm>

No message is displayed on Modules 4 to inform of the modulefiles that have been removed from the loading list in initialization file.

Empty B<module load> line is left on version 4 when last modulefile from a line is asked to be removed. On compatibility version B<module load null> line is set in this case.

=item B<initclear>

Empty B<module load> lines are left on version 4 whereas B<module load null> lines are set on compatibility version.

=back

=head2 Modules Specific Tcl Commands

=over

=item B<append-path>

=item B<prepend-path>

Modules 4 produces an error when adding a bare colon character I<:> as a path element to a path-like variable, as this colon cannot be distinguished from the colon used for path separator.

Modules 4 supports adding or removing empty path element to a path-like variable, whereas compatibility version looses track of this path element when the path-like variable is modified afterward. Empty path element enables to set a leading colon character I<:>, which has a specific meaning on some regular environment variable like B<MANPATH> or B<LD_LIBRARY_PATH>.

=item B<remove-path>

Modules 4 provides path element counting feature which increases a reference counter each time a given path entry is added to a given environment variable. As consequence a path entry element is removed from a path-like variable only if the related element counter is equal to 1. If this counter is greater than 1, path element is kept in variable and reference counter is decreased by 1.

=item B<exit>

On Modules 4 code passed to the B<exit> Modules specific Tcl command will not be thrown to be the B<module> return value.

=item B<module-alias>

=item B<module-version>

In case the specified aliased module or the symbolic version introduces a resolution loop with already defined aliases or symbolic versions, this new alias or symbolic version is not registered and an error message is raised. On compatibility version, alias or symbolic version introducing loop are registered as the modulefile resolution is not computed at registration time.

=item B<module-info>

=over

=item B<module-info flags>

=item B<module-info trace>

=item B<module-info tracepat>

=item B<module-info user>

These B<module-info> options are related to compatibility version-specific features so they are available on Modules 4 but with a dummy implementation that always returns false or an empty value.

=item B<module-info mode>

During an B<unload> sub-command, I<unload> is returned instead of I<remove>. However if B<mode> is tested against I<remove> value, true will be returned.

During a B<switch> sub-command, I<unload> then I<load> is returned instead of I<switch1> then I<switch2> then I<switch3>. However if B<mode> is tested against I<switch> value, true will be returned.

=item B<module-info version>

Declared aliases or symbolic versions are not registered anymore if they introduce a resolution loop. As a result B<module-info version> does not return an I<*undef*> string value as it does not face resolution loop situation anymore.

=item B<module-info symbols>

Declared aliases or symbolic versions are not registered anymore if they introduce a resolution loop. As a consequence symbolic versions introducing loop situation are not part anymore of the B<module-info symbols> returned result as they are not registered.

A symbolic version sets on a module alias will be propagated toward the resolution path to also apply to the relative I<modulefile> if it still correspond to the same module name.

=back

=item B<module-log>

=item B<module-trace>

=item B<module-user>

=item B<module-verbosity>

These Modules specific Tcl commands are related to compatibility version-specific features so they are available on Modules 4 but with a dummy implementation that always displays a warning message saying the command is not implemented.

=item B<module-whatis>

When multiple words are passed as argument to B<module-whatis> but they are not enclosed in double-quotes or curly braces they will be displayed as a single line on Modules 4 whereas compatibility version displays them as one line per word.

=item B<set-alias>

Whereas compatibility version sets a shell function when variables are in use in alias value on Bourne shell derivatives, Modules 4 always defines a shell alias never a shell function.

=back

=head2 Locating Modulefiles

On version 4, when a module alias is set and overrides name of an existing directory, this alias is taken into account to locate the default version of this module name and the I<modulefiles> locating in the directory are ignored.

When looking for an implicit default in a I<modulefile> directory, aliases are taken into account in addition to I<modulefiles> and directories to determine the highest numerically sorted element.

Modules 4 will resolve module alias or symbolic version passed to B<unload> command to then remove the loaded modulefile pointed by the mentioned alias or symbolic version.

Modules 4 resolves module alias or symbolic version pointing to a I<modulefile> located in another modulepath.

Distinguish access issue (permission denied) from find issue (cannot locate) when trying to access directly a directory or a modulefile as done on B<load>, B<display> or B<whatis> commands. In addition, on this kind of access not readable F<.modulerc> or F<.version> files are ignored rather producing a missing magic cookie error.

=head1 Features specific to the new main version

This section describes the features of Modules version 4 that are not supported on the compatibility version. Please refer to the above section for features supported by both versions but behaving differently.

=head2 Package Initialization

Compatibility version does not support I<fish>, I<lisp>, I<tcl> and I<R> as code output.

=head2 Command line switches

=over

=item B<--debug>, B<-D>

=item B<--default>, B<-d>

=item B<--latest>, B<-L>

These command line switches are not supported on compatibility version.

=back

=head2 Module Sub-Commands

All module sub-commands will return a non-zero exit code in case of error whereas on compatibility version issues that occurred do not lead to an exit of the B<module> command with a non-zero code.

=over

=item B<reload>

=item B<source>

=item B<search>

=item B<save>

=item B<restore>

=item B<saverm>

=item B<saveshow>

=item B<savelist>

=item B<path>

=item B<paths>

=item B<autoinit>

=item B<aliases>

=item B<test>

These module sub-commands are not supported on compatibility version.

=item B<avail>

=item B<whatis>

=item B<apropos>

Non-critical errors are not displayed on these sub-commands. Only valid results are returned.

Module aliases are included in the result of these sub-commands. They are displayed in the module path section where they are defined or in a I<global/user modulerc> section for aliases set in user's or global modulerc file. A B<@> symbol is added in parenthesis next to their name to distinguish them from I<modulefiles>.

Search may be performed with an alias or a symbolic version-name passed as argument.

=back

=head2 Collections

Modules collections are not supported on compatibility version.

=head2 Modules Specific Tcl Commands

=over

=item B<module>

In case of B<module load> command specifying multiple I<modulefiles>, when mode is set to B<unload> these I<modulefiles> will be unloaded in the reverse order to ensure correct handling of prerequisites.

=item B<module-info>

=over

=item B<module-info command>

This B<module-info> option is not supported on compatibility version.

=back

=back
