.\" RCSID @(#)$Id: avec.man,v 1.1 2002/07/18 22:03:39 rkowen Exp $
.\" LIBDIR
.TH "avec" "3rko" "31 Oct 1997"
.SH NAME
avec \- associative vector (hash array) stores data according to a string key.

.SH SYNOPSIS

.nf

enum avec_def_fns {AVEC_DEFAULT, AVEC_USER, AVEC_COUNT, AVEC_STDC
#  ifdef HAVE_STRMALLOC
	, AVEC_STRMALLOC
#endif
	};


typedef struct {
	/* store the data type - user can ignore this */
	enum avec_def_fns	type;
	int  (*data_add)(void **,va_list); /* allocate data element for insert*/
	int  (*data_del)(void **,va_list); /* dealloc  data element for delete*/
	int  (*data_rm)(void **,va_list);  /* remove   data element for close*/
} avec_fns;
	
typedef struct {
	char const	 *key;		/* key for associative array */
	void		 *data;		/* container for datum */
} avec_element;

typedef struct {
	char		  tag[5];	/* name tag for this type */
	avec_element	**hash;		/* container for keys & data */
	int		  number;	/* current number of hash */
	int		  capacity;	/* the possible capacity of hash */
	int		  percentage;	/* percentage of capacity that
					   forces a resize larger 
					   (< 0 = no resizeing )*/
	avec_fns	  fns;		/* which alloc fns to use */
} avec;

/* shield users from certain internal details */
#define AVEC_KEY(elemptr)	((elemptr)->key)
#define AVEC_DATA(elemptr)	((elemptr)->data)


int                avec_set_fns(enum avec_def_fns type, avec_fns *fns);
enum avec_def_fns  avec_get_fns(void);

avec  *avec_ctor_(int cap, avec_fns fns);
avec  *avec_ctor(int cap);
int    avec_dtor(avec **av, ...);
avec  *avec_alloc_(avec_fns strfns);
avec  *avec_alloc(void);
int    avec_dealloc(avec **av);
int    avec_init_(avec *av, int cap, avec_fns fns);
int    avec_init(avec *av, int cap);
int    avec_close(avec *av, ...);

int    avec_exists(avec const *av);
int    avec_capacity(avec const *av);
int    avec_number(avec const *av);
int    avec_resize_percentage(avec *av, int percentage);
 
int    avec_resize(avec *av, int newcap);
int    avec_increase(avec *av, int newcap);
int    avec_decrease(avec *av, int newcap);

int    avec_insert(avec *av, char const *key, ...);
int    avec_delete(avec *av, char const *key, ...);
int    avec_remove(avec *av, char const *key, ...);
void  *avec_lookup(avec *av, char const *key);

avec_element             **avec_walk_r(avec *av, avec_element **ptrptr);
avec_element             **avec_walk(avec *av);
char const * const        *avec_keys(avec *av);
void                     **avec_values(avec *av);
avec_element const *const *avec_hash(avec *av);

.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I avec
could have easily been made a C++ class, but is
confined to C so that it can be maximally portable.
This is an associative vector package (a hash array)
that uses open-addressed
quadratic hashing to search the hash array.
That is, open-addressed means that all the data is stored in
the hash table itself, as opposed to using chained lists.
Quadratic hashing uses a hashing and search algorithm that is second order,
which may have second order clustering.
.P
An associative vector provides approximately constant access to the
stored data by using a hash function that converts the string key
to an index in the hash array, then compares the key to what is stored
in the data element, and if they compare then returns a pointer to
the data.
A perfect hashing function would have no ``collisions'' between
any two of the input keys and would deliver a unique hash value
for each.  However, this is not usually the case, and the quadratic
hashing identifies subsequent hash array indexes to test.
.P
The capacity of the hash array should be a prime value and
all capacities passed into any of the functions will be increased
to the closet prime value.
.P
All the functions,
except for the accessor and constructor functions,
return 0 if no error or return <0 otherwise.

.TP 15
.I avec_set_fns
register the set of data functions to use by default.

.TP
.I avec_get_fns
query as to which set of data functions are being used,
only the values given by enum avec_def_fns will be returned.

.TP
.I avec_ctor_
construct associative vector to at least capacity ``cap''
using the given set of data functions.

.TP
.I avec_ctor
construct associative vector to capacity ``cap''
using the default set of data functions.

.TP
.I avec_dtor
destroy the associative vector and all contents.

.TP
.I avec_alloc_
allocate the uninitialized avec object (no hash array is allocated)
using the given set of data functions.

.TP
.I avec_alloc
allocate the uninitialized avec object (no hash array is allocated)
using the default set of data functions.

.TP
.I avec_dealloc
Deallocate the avec object (hash array data elements are not touched)
but the avec_element's are deallocated hence losing the keys and
pointers to the data.  The user should have collected these pointers
prior to this call, else there will be a massive memory leak.

.TP
.I avec_init_
initialize associative vector to capacity ``cap''
using the given set of data functions.  Creates the internal hash array.

.TP
.I avec_init
initialize associative vector to capacity ``cap''
using the default set of data functions.  Creates the internal hash array.

.TP
.I avec_close
destroy the associative vector contents - data and keys.

.TP
.I avec_exists
returns 0 if the associative vector is not constructed, else non-0.
.TP
.I avec_capacity
returns the maximum capacity of the associative vector, otherwise returns -1
if the vector is not defined or there are no elements to the vector.
.TP
.I avec_number
returns the current number of entries (must always be less than
the capacity, otherwise returns -1 if the vector is not defined.
.TP
.I avec_resize_percentage
Sets or gets the percentage size of number to capacity that
will cause an automatic resizing of the hash to a larger capacity.
.br
If percent==0 then it returns the current value, or the value 0 if
no automatic resizing will be done.
.br
If percent < 0 then it turns off automatic resizing.
If 10 < percent < 70 then automatic resizing will kick in if
number/capacity * 100% > percent.

.TP
.I avec_resize
Resize the internal hash array to the new capacity, which must be as large
as the current collection of data elements!

.TP
.I avec_increase
Enlarge the internal hash array to the new capacity.

.TP
.I avec_decrease
Resize the internal hash array to the new capacity, which must be as large
as the current collection of data elements!

.TP
.I avec_insert
``insert'' an element for the given key.  This calls the object data_add
function, which must handle either an empty slot or a pre-existing slot.
See the section on
.IR avec_fns .

.TP
.I avec_delete
``deletes'' an element for the given key.  This calls the object data_del
function, which must handle a pre-existing slot and either clear it
or perform some action on it.
See the section on
.IR avec_fns .

.TP
.I avec_remove
``removes'' an element for the given key.  This calls the object data_rm
function, which must handle a pre-existing slot and remove the data.
See the section on
.IR avec_fns .

.TP
.I avec_lookup
Returns the address of the pointer to the data element pointed
to by the given key.

.TP
.I avec_walk_r
A re-entrant version of
.I avec_walk
which will march through the entries of the object hash array
with repeated calls
returning a address of the pointer to the avec_element that contains the
key and the data.
The first call should have ptrptr = NULL, (unless you know exactly
what you're doing).
.I avec_walk_r
will return NULL when all the elements have been visited.
See the example.

.TP
.I avec_walk
marches through the entries of the object hash array
with repeated calls
returning a pointer to the avec_element that contains the
key and the data.
The first call must have av pointing to an avec object,
and subsequent calls must have av=NULL.
br
This routine is not thread safe since it uses internal static variables.
It should not be used at all.  Use
.I avec_walk_r
instead.  See the example.

.TP
.I avec_keys
Returns a Unix vector of pointers to the keys in the hash array.
The returned vector needs to be free'd when through.
Do not change the key values, else it screws up the hashing.

.TP
.I avec_values
Returns a Unix vector of pointers to the data in the hash array.
The returned vector needs to be free'd when through.
The data values can be changed.

.TP
.I avec_hash
Returns pointer to the internal hash array.  This routine is only
meant for those users that want to study the hashing distribution.

.SH AVEC_FNS

.I avec
provides the hashing mechanism only, and leaves the data handling
to call-back functions.  A default set is provided which just
associates a string to a key, and does not overwrite the stored
string on subsequent calls to
.I avec_insert
for the same key.
.P
The form of these functions using StdC functions are as follows:

.nf
/* --------------------------------------------------- */
/* wrappers for the StdC string functions
 */
int stdc_malloc (void **data, va_list ap) {
        char const *str = va_arg(ap,char *);
        if (!data) return -1;
        if (*data) return 1;
        if((*data = calloc((strlen(str)+1),sizeof(char)))) {
                (void) strcpy((char *) *data, str);
                return 0;
        }
        return -2;
}
int stdc_free (void **data, va_list ap) {
        free(*data);
        *data = (char *) NULL;
        return 0;
}

avec_fns stdc_fns = {
        AVEC_STDC,
        stdc_malloc,
        stdc_free,
        stdc_free
};

.fi
Note that the
.I data_add
function
.I stdc_malloc
returns 1 if the key already exists and only returns 0 if
the data slot was unoccupied and a string memory allocation
was successfully completed and the pointer placed there.
A zero signals to
.I avec_insert
success and to increment the number of elements in the hash
.P
The second function in the
.I avec_fns
structure
.IR data_del ,
.I std_free
in this case, is called only by
.I avec_delete
and does not need to deallocate the data, but must return
a positive value in this case.  However, if it does
deallocate the data then and only then it can return 0.
This is the function used by
.IR avec_delete .
.P
The third function in the
.I ave_fns
structure is
.I data_rm
and for the default case is
.I std_free
also.  This function must deallocate the data and never return a value
greater than 0.  To do so is an error and may cause unexpected behavior.
This is the function used by
.I avec_remove
and
.IR avec_close .

.P
A second set of provided
.I avec_fns
can be used by declaring
.I avec_set_fns(AVEC_COUNT, NULL);
which will then use the internal counting functions for the
next
.IR avec_ctor(capacity) ,
which does
not allocate any memory for the data, but stores a numerical
value in the (void *) data pointer.
However, the numerical limit is limited by the size of a (void *)
pointer, and it's upto the application to cast to an appropriate
size integer type.  However, the following code fragment might be
of use for a generalized way to retrieve values,  but ignore
any compiler warnings because at least one of the casts should
be to a different size.  A more efficient way would be to use a
.I GNU configure
script to arrive at the void * pointer size and use the appropriate
sized integer, prior to compile time.
.nf

/* convert a void *  to a long */
long v2l (void *vptr) {
	unsigned int	icount;
	unsigned short	scount;
	unsigned long	lcount;

	if (sizeof(void *) == sizeof(unsigned int)) {
		icount = (unsigned int) vptr;
		lcount = icount;
	} else if (sizeof(void *) == sizeof(unsigned short)) {
		scount = (unsigned short) vptr;
		lcount = scount;
	} else if (sizeof(void *) == sizeof(unsigned long)) {
		lcount = (unsigned long) vptr;
	} else {
		lcount = (unsigned long) vptr;
	}
	return lcount;
}
.fi

.SH EXAMPLES

The following example counts some words that are inserted.
(Some more detailed and varying examples can be viewed in the
.I wf.c
and
.I memdbg.c
sources.)

.nf
#include <stdio.h>
#include "avec.h"

int main() {
	avec *wordcount;
	avec_element **elem = (avec_element **) NULL;
	int i;

	if (avec_set_fns(AVEC_COUNT, NULL)) return -2;
	if (!(wordcount = avec_ctor(50))) return -1;
	if (avec_resize_percentage(wordcount,40)) return -3;

	avec_insert(wordcount,"first");
	for (i=0; i < 4; i++) {
		avec_insert(wordcount,"second");
		avec_insert(wordcount,"third");
	}

	while ((elem = avec_walk_r(wordcount, elem))) {
		printf("%s\t%d\n", AVEC_KEY(*elem), (int) AVEC_DATA(*elem));
	}

	if(avec_dtor(&wordcount)) return -4;

	return 0;
}
.fi
.P
Should get the following results:
.nf
first	1
third	4
second	4
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
malloc(3),free(3),strmalloc(3rko),rkoerror(3rko),uvec(3rko)

.SH NOTES

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Uses the
.I rkoerror
mechanism, and should be self explanatory.

.SH BUGS

.SH AUTHOR
R.K.Owen,Ph.D. 2002/02/14

.KEY WORDS
