.\" RCSID @(#)$Id: list.man,v 1.1 2002/07/29 20:10:32 rkowen Exp $
.\" LIBDIR
.TH "LIST" "3rko" "31 October 1998"
.SH NAME
list \- generic list ``object'' for Std-C that can contain any sort
of data type or struct.

.SH SYNOPSIS

.nf
#include "list.h"

defines the following structures and typedef's:

typedef struct list list;
typedef struct list_elem list_elem;

/* warning sizeof(list) does not necessarily give the correct memory size
 * since we make it "expandable" to handle a variable size tag
 */
struct list {
	list_elem *first;		/* head of list */
	list_elem *last;		/* last in list */
	int number;			/* number in list */
	int (*addfn)(void **, va_list);	/* user fn to add user data */
	int (*delfn)(void **, va_list);	/* user fn to del user data */
	char tag[1];			/* name tag for list */
/* followed by expanded memory allocation to contain rest of tag with
 * terminating NULL.  A list object must only be defined as "list *"
 * and set with list_ctor(TAG,ADDFN,DELFN);
 */
};

struct list_elem {
	list_elem *prev;		/* previous one in list */
	list_elem *next;		/* next one in list */
	void *object;			/* pointer to object of interest */
};

/* shield users from  certain internal details */
#define LIST_OBJECT(le)	((le)->object)
#define LIST_NEXT(le)	((le)->next)
#define LIST_PREV(le)	((le)->prev)

list *list_ctor(const char *tag,
	int (addfn)(void **, va_list), int (delfn)(void **, va_list));
int list_dtor(list **lst, char const *tag, ...);

int list_exists(list const *lst, const char *tag);
int list_sizeof(list const *lst, const char *tag);
int list_number(list const *lst, const char *tag);
list_elem *list_first(list const *lst, const char *tag);
list_elem *list_last(list const *lst, const char *tag);

int list_append(list *lst, char const *tag, list_elem *here, ...);
int list_insert(list *lst, char const *tag, list_elem *here, ...);
int list_delete(list *lst, char const *tag, list_elem *here, ...);

int list_push(list *lst, char const *tag, ...);
int list_pop(list *lst, char const *tag, ...);
int list_unshift(list *lst, char const *tag, ...);
int list_shift(list *lst, char const *tag, ...);

int list_swap(list *lst, char const *tag, list_elem *here, list_elem *there);
int list_qsort(list *lst, char const *tag,
		int (*cmp)(const void *, const void *));

.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I list
could have easily been made a C++ class, but is confined to C for
maximum portability.
.I list
is designed for easy constant time adding or deleting elements
at the beginning or end of the list.
It uses user-defined functions to handle the actual insertion
or deletion
of user data in a list element, which just contains a (void *)
pointer to the user data.
To see how this is done, it's best to look at the example below.
.P
All the functions refer to a ``tag'', a simple ASCII string that
the library will compare with.  This ensures that the list object
is not refered to incorrectly.
.P
All the functions, except for the ``constructor'' or
accessor functions, return 0 if no error occured, else
return <0 if an error occured.
The
.I list_pop
and
.I list_shift
functions will return 1, if they're executed on an empty list.
(This is not considered an error, but something the user may
wish to know.)

.TP 15
.I list_ctor
construct the list object, registering a tag and user functions for
handling the user data.
.TP
.I list_dtor
destroy the list object.
.TP
.I list_exists
returns 0 if the list is not constructed.
.TP
.I list_sizeof
returns the particular sizeof the list structure, which depends on
the tag size, otherwise returns -1
if the list is not defined.
.TP
.I list_number
returns the number of elements in the list, otherwise returns -1
if the list is not defined.
.TP
.I list_first
returns a pointer to the first list_elem in the list object.
It's intended for creating sequential access through the list.
.TP
.I list_last
returns a pointer to the last list_elem in the list object.
It's intended for creating sequential access through the list.

.TP
.I list_append
add a new element immediately after the given element.
If the given element is NULL then the new element is appended
at the end of the list (i.e.
.IR list_push ).
.TP
.I list_insert
add a new element immediately before the given element.
If the given element is NULL then the new element is inserted
at the beginning of the list (i.e.
.IR list_unshift ).
.TP
.I list_delete
delete the given element in the list.

.TP
.I list_unshift
add an element to the beginning of the list.  It has a variable length
argument, which is passed to the user-defined add-function,
to allow data to be entered in the argument list.
.TP
.I list_shift
delete an element at the end of the list.  It has a variable
length argument, which is passed to the user-define delete-function,
to allow user data handling.
.TP
.I list_push
add an element to the end of the list.  It has a variable length
argument, which is passed to the user-defined add-function,
to allow data to be entered in the argument list.
.TP
.I list_pop
delete an element at the end of the list.  It has a variable
length argument, which is passed to the user-define delete-function,
to allow user data handling.

.TP
.I list_swap
Swaps the contents of the two given elements.  This list element
itself does not change location.  Only the contents are exchanged.
.TP
.I list_qsort
Sorts the list contents according to the passed in comparison function.
The list elements themselves remain the same.  Only the contents are
exchanged and sorted.
(See
.I qsort(3)
for more details.)

.TP
.I LIST_OBJECT
a macro that ``returns'' a pointer to the object given a list_elem
.TP
.I LIST_NEXT
a macro that ``returns'' a pointer to the next list_elem
.TP
.I LIST_PREV
a macro that ``returns'' a pointer to the previous list_elem
.TP
.I addfn(void **, va_list)
the user function for adding data in a list element.
It must return 0 if successful.
It's advised to return a value less than -1 for errors, since
list_unshift and list_push will return -1 on error.
.TP
.I delfn(void **, va_list)
the user function for deleting data in a list element.
It must return 0 if successful.
It's advised to return a value less than -1 for errors, since
list_shift and list_pop will return -1 on error
(and 1 if the list is empty).

.SH EXAMPLES
This example just stores, prints, and remove a list of ``double''
values.
.nf
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdarg.h>

#define RKOERROR	/* enable use of librko error facility */
#include "rkoerror.h"
#include "list.h"

/*----- functions to handle a single element of "double" data -----*/
int addflt(void **ptr, va_list ap) {
	double *iptr;
	if ((iptr = malloc(sizeof(double))) == (double *) NULL)
		return -1;
	*iptr = va_arg(ap, double);
	*ptr = (void *)iptr;
	return 0;
}

int delflt(void **ptr, va_list ap) {
	free(*ptr);
	*ptr = (void *) NULL;
	return 0;
}

int cmpflt(const void *e1, const void *e2) {
	if (**(double **)e1 < **(double **)e2)
		return -1;
	else if (**(double **)e1 > **(double **)e2)
		return  1;
	else
		return 0;
}



int main() {
	list *listobj = (list *) NULL;
	const char tagflt[] = "FLOATS";
	list_elem *eptr;

	/* construct list object */
	if ((listobj = list_ctor(tagflt, addflt, delflt)) == (list *) NULL)
		rkoperror("main");

	/* add elements to flt list */
	if (list_unshift(listobj, tagflt, 3.3)) rkoperror("main");
	if (list_unshift(listobj, tagflt, 2.2)) rkoperror("main");
	if (list_unshift(listobj, tagflt, 1.1)) rkoperror("main");
	if (list_push(listobj, tagflt, 2.2)) rkoperror("main");
	if (list_push(listobj, tagflt, 1.1)) rkoperror("main");
	
	/* display contents of list */
	printf("number=%d sizeof=%d", list_number(listobj, tagflt),
		list_sizeof(listobj, tagflt));
	for (eptr = list_first(listobj,tagflt); eptr != (list_elem *) NULL;
	eptr = LIST_NEXT(eptr)) {
		printf(" %3.1f :", *(double *)LIST_OBJECT(eptr));
	}
	printf("\n");

	/* sort list */
	if (list_qsort(listobj, tagflt, cmpflt)) rkoperror("main");

	/* display again */
	printf("number=%d sizeof=%d", list_number(listobj, tagflt),
		list_sizeof(listobj, tagflt));
	for (eptr = list_first(listobj,tagflt); eptr != (list_elem *) NULL;
	eptr = LIST_NEXT(eptr)) {
		printf(" %3.1f :", *(double *)LIST_OBJECT(eptr));
	}
	printf("\n");

	/* destroy the list object */
	if (list_dtor(&listobj, tagflt)) rkoperror("main");

	return 0;
}

.fi
should display when executed:
.nf
number=5 sizeof=30 1.1 : 2.2 : 3.3 : 2.2 : 1.1 :
number=5 sizeof=30 1.1 : 1.1 : 2.2 : 2.2 : 3.3 :

.fi
.P
A more complex example is to use a user-defined structure.  The full
program will not be shown, except for the few differences from the
above code.

.nf
typedef struct mix mix;
struct mix {
	int ival;
	double fval;
};
/*----- handle a single element of "struct" data -----*/
int addmix(void **ptr, va_list ap) {
	mix *iptr;
	if ((iptr = malloc(sizeof(mix))) == (mix *) NULL)
		return -1;
	iptr->ival = va_arg(ap, int);
	iptr->fval = va_arg(ap, double);
	*ptr = (void *)iptr;
	return 0;
}

int delmix(void **ptr, va_list ap) {
	free(*ptr);
	*ptr = (void *) NULL;
	return 0;
}

int cmpmix(const void *e1, const void *e2) {
	/* sort on ival */
	if ((*(mix **)e1)->ival < (*(mix **)e2)->ival)
		return -1;
	else if ((*(mix **)e1)->ival > (*(mix **)e2)->ival)
		return  1;
	else
		return 0;
}

 ...
	if (list_unshift(listobj, tagmix, 1, 1.1)) rkoerror("main");
 ...
	printf(" %d | %3.1f :",
		(((mix *)LIST_OBJECT(eptr))->ival),
		(((mix *)LIST_OBJECT(eptr))->fval));
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
malloc(3),free(3),uvec(3rko),rkoerror(3rko)

.SH AUTHOR
R.K.Owen,Ph.D.

.KEY WORDS
