.\" RCSID @(#)$Id: memdebug.man,v 1.1 2002/08/27 21:07:41 rkowen Exp $
.\" LIBDIR
.TH "MEMDEBUG" "3rko" "12 May 1995"
.SH NAME
memdebug \- a set of macros that provides a front-end for the memory allocation
routines to help find memory leaks.  Supports only the ANSI-C routines:
.IR calloc , free , malloc , realloc.

.SH SYNOPSIS

 \.\.\. usual standard headers
 #define MEMDEBUG
 #include "memdebug.h"
 \.\.\. code that calls the memory allocation routines

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I memdebug
provides several front-end routines for the ANSI-C memory allocation
routines.  It outputs the routine name, pointer(s), file name,
and line number to output.  This can be analyzed to see that allocations
are matched with deallocations.

.P
The only user callable function is
.I FILE *memdebug_output(FILE *output)
which will set the output stream for the memdebug routines
if output is not NULL, else it will return the FILE *stream
that will be used if output is set NULL.  The default stream
is
.IR stderr .
This routine should be called before any memory allocations are done.
.P
This routine is provide, because it may be more convenient to set it to
.I stdout
or whatever file stream the regular output goes to
so that the MEMDEBUG lines can be
synchronized between the program and the memory
allocation calls.

.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>

#define MEMDEBUG
#include "memdebug.h"		/* include this AFTER stdlib.h */

typedef struct Trial {
	int a;
	double b;
	char c[5];
	struct Trial *next;
} trial;

int main() {

	size_t num = 20;
	int *ia = (int *) NULL;
	double *da = (double *) NULL;
	char *ca = (char *) NULL;
	trial *ta = (trial *) NULL;

	printf("Some regular output\n");
	memdebug_output(stdout);	/* set memdebug output */

	if ((ia = (int *) malloc(num * sizeof(int))) == NULL)
		(void) fprintf(stderr,"malloc error\n");
	free(ia);
	ia = (int *) NULL;

	if ((ia = (int *) malloc(2 * num * sizeof(int))) == NULL)
		(void) fprintf(stderr,"malloc error\n");
	if ((ia = (int *) realloc(ia, 4 * num * sizeof(int))) == NULL)
		(void) fprintf(stderr,"realloc error\n");

	if ((da = (double *) malloc(num * sizeof(double))) == NULL)
		(void) fprintf(stderr,"malloc error\n");

	if ((ta = (trial *) calloc(num, sizeof(trial))) == NULL)
		(void) fprintf(stderr,"malloc error\n");
	free(ta);
	ta = (trial *) NULL;

	if ((ta = (trial *) calloc(2 * num, sizeof(trial))) == NULL)
		(void) fprintf(stderr,"malloc error\n");

	if ((da = (double *) realloc(da, 2 * num * sizeof(double))) == NULL)
		(void) fprintf(stderr,"realloc error\n");
	free(ia);
	ia = (int *) NULL;

	if ((ca = (char *) malloc(num * sizeof(char))) == NULL)
		(void) fprintf(stderr,"malloc error\n");
	printf("Some more regular output\n");

	free(da);
	free(ta);
	free(ca);
	free(ia);

	return 0;
}
.fi
.P
The output generated by the above code should look something like:
.nf
Some regular output
RKOMEM:         malloc : tmemdebug.c 36 : 0x8049fd8 80
RKOMEM:         free   : tmemdebug.c 38 : 0x8049fd8
RKOMEM:         malloc : tmemdebug.c 41 : 0x8049fd8 160
RKOMEM: realloc_free   : tmemdebug.c 43 : 0x8049fd8
RKOMEM: realloc_malloc : tmemdebug.c 43 : 0x8049fd8 320
RKOMEM:         malloc : tmemdebug.c 46 : 0x804a120 160
RKOMEM:         calloc : tmemdebug.c 49 : 0x804a1c8 20 24
RKOMEM:         free   : tmemdebug.c 51 : 0x804a1c8
RKOMEM:         calloc : tmemdebug.c 54 : 0x804a1c8 40 24
RKOMEM: realloc_free   : tmemdebug.c 57 : 0x804a120
RKOMEM: realloc_malloc : tmemdebug.c 57 : 0x804a590 320
RKOMEM:         free   : tmemdebug.c 59 : 0x8049fd8
RKOMEM:         malloc : tmemdebug.c 62 : 0x8049fd8 20
Some more regular output
RKOMEM:         free   : tmemdebug.c 67 : 0x804a590
RKOMEM:         free   : tmemdebug.c 68 : 0x804a1c8
RKOMEM:         free   : tmemdebug.c 69 : 0x8049fd8
RKOMEM:         free   : tmemdebug.c 70 : (null)
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
.\" crontab(1),stat(2),libmon(8)
memdbg(1rko), calloc(3), free(3), malloc(3), realloc(3)

.SH NOTES
Must define the macro MEMDEBUG before include the memdebug.h header.
This header should be included after the standard headers, particularly
stdlib.h which may be included in some of the other standard headers also.

If the macro MEMDEBUG is not defined
then nothing happens and the standard memory
allocation calls are used.

.SH AUTHOR
R.K.Owen,Ph.D.

.KEY WORDS
