.\" RCSID @(#)$Id: strmalloc.man,v 1.1 2002/07/18 22:23:57 rkowen Exp $
.TH "STRMALLOC" "3rko" "01 Sept 1999"
.SH NAME
strmalloc \- adds a strdup-like routine for copying strings
strfree \- frees the string memory storage
.SH SYNOPSIS

 #include "strmallloc.h"

 /* old interface */
 char	*strnmalloc(	char const *in, size_t n);
 char	*strmalloc(	char const *in);
 int	 strfree(	char **str);
 
 /* new interface */
 char	*str_nmalloc(	char const *in, size_t n);
 char	*str_malloc(	char const *in);
 int	 str_free(	char **str);
 size_t	 str_sizeof(	char const *str);
 char	*str_ncpy(	char **str, char *in, size_t n);
 char	*str_cpy(	char **str, char *in);
 char	*str_ncat(	char **str, char *in, size_t n);
 char	*str_cat(	char **str, char *in);

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I str_malloc
adds a strdup-like function for routinely allocating memory
and copying a string to some other location.
The only difference is that
.I str_malloc
allocates memory on the heap via
.I malloc()
instead of the stack.  Hence the memory needs to be freed
explicitly.  Use the associated
.I str_free
to free up the memory.   First it will wipe out the memory area
and then call
.IR free() .
.P
.TP 15
.I str_malloc
copy a string and allocate memory for it, along with some internal
data.
.TP
.I strmalloc
same as above.
.TP
.I str_nmalloc
same as
.I str_malloc
but the amount to allocate and copy is specified.  Can be over or under
the string length.
.TP
.I strnmalloc
same as above.
.TP
.I str_free
free a string object, clearing memory as much as possible.
.TP
.I strfree
same as above.
.TP
.I str_sizeof
gives the allocated length of the string.
.TP
.I str_cpy
like strcpy, but for string objects.
Will automatically extend the allocated space if needed.
.TP
.I str_ncpy
like strncpy, but for string objects, and can be over
or under the string length.
Will automatically extend the allocated space if needed.
.TP
.I str_cat
like strcat, but for string objects.
Will automatically extend the allocated space if needed.
.TP
.I str_ncat
like strncat, but for string objects, and can be over
or under the string length.
Will automatically extend the allocated space if needed.

.SH NOTES
The allocated memory will actually be a few bytes larger, since
.I str_malloc
prepends the length of the string and a identifiable tag string.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If any of the routines that return (char *) return a NULL,
then some sort of error occured.
.P
.I str_sizeof
returns (size_t) -1 if an invalid string object, note that (size_t)
may be an unsigned integer type and that the return value may not
be negative, but a rather huge positive value.  Always test for
(size_t) -1 by direct comparison.
.P
.I str_free()
only returns an error if the user sent an invalid string object
(i.e. user error).
Details can be queried from
.I rkoerrno
and
.I rkostrerror()
if RKOERROR is enabled.
However, it's not really necessary for the same reasons that
.I free()
doesn't return a status.

.SH SEE ALSO
string(3), strdup(3), malloc(3), free(3), rkoerror(3rko)

.SH AUTHOR
R.K.Owen,Ph.D.

.KEY WORDS
